The psychology behind the concept

Why gamification works so well? Why do we love games?

Why do we love to play games for hours wasting hours on a virtual character? As it turns out games combine 3 things our brains love the most:
1) Instant gratification - Dopamine - Rewards
2) Clear goals
3) Clear progress

I. Instant gratification 

QQ: https://positivepsychology.com/instant-gratification/

QQInstant (or immediate) gratification is a term that refers to the temptation, and resulting tendency, to forego a future benefit in order to obtain a less rewarding but more immediate benefit. When you have a desire for something pleasurable—be it food, entertainment, or sex—you rarely think thoughts like, “My stomach is rumbling and I would love to have that delicious dish, but I’d rather wait another hour.”

It’s a natural human urge to want good things and to want them NOW. It has almost certainly provided an evolutionary advantage for humans and their ancestors, as life for pre-modern humans hinged on decisions made and actions taken in the immediate far more than those intended for long-term gain.

It’s all well and good to plan for the future, but actions that are taken to benefit you in the here and now are much more advantageous when you’re being stalked by a fierce predator or offered the opportunity to eat your fill in a time when starvation was a much bigger concern than obesity.

The flip side of instant gratification is delayed gratification, or the decision to put off satisfying your desire in order to gain an even better reward or benefit in the future. It’s easy to see how delayed gratification is generally the wiser behavior, but we still struggle on a daily basis with the temptation to give in to our immediate desires. Why is it so difficult to choose delayed over instant gratification?QQ

Why games do better at instant gratification?

Today most of our daily tasks give delayed gratification, whilst games, social media, food and such give instant gratification. Think about it. What is your reward for completing an assignment just after you hit submit? Usually nothing, the reward comes after: you not getting a bad grade or maybe at the end of semester you get a scholarship IF you work consistently, or the reward comes even later, when you land a good job thanks to your education. These rewards are too far away to be actual motivation, especially if you consider how many more activities are there which give instant gratification. A form of this are games. Every task you complete in a game gives some sort of reward, no matter how miniscule it is. Instant gratification means instant dopamine ( PUT IN LINK FOR EXPL.). In an hour of playing WOW for e.g. you are bombarded hundred and hundreds of times by dopamine as you complete tasks. Now as you see games are great at instant rewarding, and we can learn from that. 


Here are some ideas how can you get instant gratification from everyday tasks: 

1) create a TO-DO list where you write down your tasks 
	- cross out when finished (even this action can give some satisfaction to some)

2) after a completion of a task (that you need motivation for) give yourself a small reward such as
	- drink your favourite tea / coffee
	- have a break which you spend with leisure
	- do sth that you like and takes less than 20min 
BUT: I recommend against using food rewards regularly. It is okay sometimes, but using it often can cause toxic relationship with food



II. Clear goals 

It's much easier to be motivated to do things, when you have a clear goal. Humans are essentially goal oriented creatures. Evolutionally goals used to be very clear and simple: find food & shelter to survive and be successful at these to be able to mate. Modernity brought complexity to our goals as well. We need complicated plans that often take years to accomplish and even the definition of successful became a huge philosophical question. However our psychology (which is largely based on thousounds of years old evolutionary physiology) is yet to catch up. It still craves simple goals to follow. Games give that us. In games our biggest and most simple goals are: leveling through gaining experience by doing smaller clearly defined tasks (such as collect x, hunt y monster etc.). If you think about it you probably also want to "level up" certain areas of your life - in other words, you want to improve and for that you also need to do smaller tasks. However IRL you don't see your goals and progress so clearly. But we can help that by defining clear goals for our selves (bigger and smaller as well) and then we can use systems to follow our progress towards those. Thus artificially creating the feedback we lack IRL, but get in games. Esentially showing ourselves the worth of the tasks we are doing, by visualising it in a system. Which brings us to the last thing games are great at: showing us our progress clearly.

III. Clear progress

The system that games use to follow progress may seem daunting at first, but as we play and we get gratification from numbers going up and bars progressing. We have skills we can improve, and every tasks we do adds experience, thus we level up. In life we may put hours and hours of work into something before we can easily notice any progress and even then we may not notice it at all. What if I say that we can implement the same system games use to follow progress into our life? If we do, we will have measurable progress - numbers that show us our hard work - which can help us get motivation or the determination to do tasks we need. Thus, we gamify our life. In this project I intend to show a way to do just that. To gamify your life you need to build a system that contains the 3 previous key elements. >Here< you can find the description for the system I use (with explanation for non-gamers/rpg-ers). 







